content/posts/2022/10/luhmanns-zettel-translated.md, before:

---
title: "English Translation of All Notes on Zettelkasten by Luhmann"
created_at: 2022-10-31 08:45:02 +0100
updated_at: 2022-11-02 08:11:45 +0100
kind: article
author: sascha
tags: [ luhmann ]
image: luhmann.png
description: "Faithful English translation of Niklas Luhmann's original notes on Zettelkasten."
---

I thought it would be nice if there was a common knowledge base on what Luhmann himself wrote on Zettelkasten. So here is a translation of all 18 notes of [the section 9/8 of his second Zettelkasten.](https://niklas-luhmann-archiv.de/bestand/zettelkasten/zettel/ZK_2_NB_9-8_V) I tried to find a middle ground between a translation that is faithful to his style, the nature of the German language, and the least ambigious English I can come up with.

If there is some dispute about a particular translation, I will highlight the dispute within the translation and will link to the post in the forums. [Participate in the forums!][luh-forum]

<%= insert_teaser_image caption: %Q{<a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=4529831">Luhmann.png</a> by <a href="//commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Sonntag&amp;amp;action=edit&amp;amp;redlink=1" class="new">Wikipedia User 'Sonntag'</a> (<a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0" title="Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0">CC BY-SA 3.0</a>)} %>

-----

> (<b>9/8</b><a name="9_8"></a>) Zettelkasten als kybernetisches System. Kombination von Unordnung und Ordnung, von Klumpenbildung und unvorhersehbarer, im ad hoc Zugriff realisierter Kombination. Vorbedingung: Verzicht auf festgelegte Ordnung. Die vorgeschaltete Differenzierung: Suchhilfen vs. Inhalt; Register, Fragestellungen, Einfälle vs. Vorhandenes überformt und macht z.T. entbehrlich, das, was an innerer Ordnung vorausgesetzt werden muss.

Zettelkasten as a cybernetic system. Combination of disorder and order, of lump formation, and unexpected, in ad hoc access realised combination. Prerequisite: Abandonment of fixed order. The upstream differentiation: Search aids vs content; index, questions, [spontaneous] ideas vs what already exists, reshapes and makes in part obsolete the inner order that must be assumed.

-----

> (<b>9/8a</b><a name="9_8a"></a>) Das Produktivitätsproblem muss in bezug auf eine Relation gestellt werden, nämlich in bezug auf die Relation von Zettelkasten und Benutzer.

The productivity problem has to be based on a relation, namely on the relation of Zettelkasten and user.

-----

> (<b>9/8a1</b><a name="9_8a1"></a>) Der Zettelkasten ist unaufhörlich gewachsen, und ich habe versucht, so gut ich konnte und soweit meine Fähigkeiten reichen, davon zu profitieren.

The Zettelkasten has grown incessantly, and I have tried, to the best of my ability, to profit from it.[^bobdoto]

[^bobdoto]: Translation improved by Bob Doto.

-----

> (<b>9/8a2</b><a name="9_8a2"></a>) Zettelkasten als Klärgrube – nicht nur abgeklärte Notizen hineintun. Aufschieben des Prüfens und Entscheidens – auch eine Tempofrage.

Zettelkasten as a septic tank -- don't put just treated notes in. Suspending of examination and decision making -- also a question of speed.

-----

> (<b>9/8b</b><a name="9_8b"></a>) Zur allg. Struktur von Gedächtnissen vgl. [Ashby 1967, S. 103](https://niklas-luhmann-archiv.de/bestand/literatur/item/ashby_1967_brain). Es ist danach wichtig, dass man nicht auf eine Unmenge von Punkt-für-Punkt Zugriffe angewiesen ist, sondern auf Relationen zwischen Notizen, also auf Verweisungen zurückgreifen kann, die mehr auf einmal verfügbar machen, als man bei einem Suchimpuls oder auch bei einer Gedankenfixierung im Sinn hat.

On the general organisation of memory see Ashby 1967, p103. It is therefore important that one is not dependent on a myriad of point-by-point accesses, but to be able to rely on relations between notes, i.e. on references that make more available at once than one has in mind when following a search impulse or fixating on a thought

-----

> (<b>9/8b1</b><a name="9_8b1"></a>) Wegen des vorstehenden Gesichtspunktes ist es wichtig, dass die Ordnung im Zettelkasten nicht nur unter Begriffen oder komplexen Einzelthemen aggregiert wird; obwohl das natürlich auch notwendig ist. Aber die Verweisungen dürfen nicht nur die Leitgesichtspunkte aggregierenden Sammelbegriffe erfassen, sondern müssen das unter ihnen gesammelte Material selektiv wegziehen.

Because of the previous point it is important that the order in the Zettelkasten is not aggregated merely under terms or complex single topics; although this is of course also necessary. But the connections shouldn't merely cover the leading points aggregating collective terms, but must selectively pull away the material collected under them.

-----

> (<b>9/8b2</b>) "Multiple storage" als Notwendigkeit der Speicherung von komplexen (komplex auszuwertenden) Informationen.

"Multiple storage" as the necessity of storing complex (to be evaluated in a complex way) information.

-----

> (<b>9/8c</b><a name="9_8c"></a>) Zu überlegen wäre etwas zum Problem der Interdependenzunterbrechung.

Something to consider would be the problem of interdependence interruption.

-----

> (<b>9/8d</b><a name="9_8d"></a>) Rückwirkungen auf die Lektüre: man liest anders, wenn man auf die Möglichkeiten der Verzettelung achtet – nicht: Exzerpte!

Feedback loop for reading: one reads differently if one is mindful of the possibilities of the Zettelkasten process - not: excerpts!

-----

> (<b>9/8e</b><a name="9_8e"></a>) Evtl. Rückgriff auf den Informationsbegriff, der Selektionshorizonte, Vergleichsschemata etc. voraussetzt, die nicht im Vorhinein festgelegt werden können. Daher wird der Zettelkasten produktiv insofern, als er Notiertes nichtmitnotierten Hintergründen aussetzt und dadurch Information entstehen lässt, die so nicht gespeichert war.

Possibly, recourse to the concept of information that presupposes selection horizons, comparison schemes, etc. which cannot be predetermined. Therefore, the Zettelkasten becomes productive as it exposes what is noted to what is not noted and thus allows the formation of information that was not stored in this way.

-----

> (<b>9/8f</b><a name="9_8f"></a>) Einheitlicher Effekt entsteht bei Kanalisierung in appropriate ways in das soziale System. Eindruck einer geistig muskulösen Gesamtpersönlichkeit.

A unified effect is created when channeling in appropriate ways into the social system. Impression of a mentally muscular overall personality.

-----

> (<b>9/8g</b>) Hinter der Zettelkastentechnik steht die Erfahrung: Ohne zu schreiben kann man nicht denken – jedenfalls nicht in anspruchsvollen, selektiven Zugriff aufs Gedächtnis voraussehenden Zusammenhängen. Das heißt auch: ohne Differenzen einzukerben, kann man nicht denken.

The Zettelkasten Method is based on this experience: One cannot think without writing - at least not in demanding contexts that anticipate selective access to memory. This also means: without notching differences one cannot think.

-----

> (<b>9/8h</b><a name="9_8h"></a>) Bemerkungen über Registrierung des Wissens in der Royal Society bei Sprat 1667, S. 115f. Verzicht auf vorschnelle Systematisierung und Abschliessung, Zukunftsoffenheit: "Nor ought this neglect of consequence and order, to be only thought to proceed from their carelessness; but from mature and well grounded premeditation."

Comments on registration of knowledge in the Royal Society in Sprat 1667, p. 115f. Abandonment of hasty systematization and closure, openness to the future: "Nor ought this neglect of consequence and order, to be only thought to proceed from their carelessness; but from mature and well grounded premeditation."

-----

> (<b>9/8i</b><a name="9_8i"></a>) Zettelkasten mit dem komplizierten Verdauungssystem eines Wiederkäuers. Alle arbiträren Einfälle, alle Zufälle der Lektüren, können eingebracht werden. Es entscheidet dann die interne Anschlussfähigkeit.

Zettelkasten with the complicated digestive system of a ruminant. All arbitrary ideas, all coincidences of readings, can be brought in. The internal connectivity then decides.

-----

> (<b>9/8j</b><a name="9_8j"></a>) Im Zettelkasten ist ein Zettel, der das Argument enthält, das die Behauptungen auf allen anderen Zetteln widerlegt. Aber dieser Zettel verschwindet, sobald man den Zettelkasten aufzieht. D.h. er nimmt eine andere Nummer an, verstellt sich und ist dann nicht zu finden. Ein Joker.

There is a note in the Zettelkasten that contains the argument that refutes the claims on every other note. But this note disappears as soon as one opens the Zettelkasten. I.e. it appropriates a different number, changes position (or: disguises itself) and is then not to be found. A joker.

-----

> (<b>9/8,1</b><a name="9_8,1"></a>) Thema: Kommunikation mit dem Zettelkasten: Wie kommt man zu einem adaequaten Partner, Junior-Partner? – wichtig, nachdem das Arbeiten mit Personal immer schwieriger und immer teurer wird. Zettels Wirklichkeit

Topic: Communication with the Zettelkasten: How to get an adequate partner, junior partner? -- important after working with staff becomes more and more difficult and expensive. Zettel's reality

-----

> (<b>9/8,2</b><a name="9_8,2"></a>) Personal ist schon lange knapp und teuer, jetzt wird es zusätzlich ungebärdig und unleitbar. Die Mikroprozessoren sind angekündigt, aber noch nicht wirklich verfügbar. Das eigene Gedächtnis mangelhaft und entlastungsbedürftig. Überlegungen zu einem Versuch, sich ein Zweitgedächtnis zu schaffen.

Personnel has been scarce and expensive for a long time, now it additionally becomes unruly and unmanageable. Microprocessors have been announced, but are not really available yet. One's own memory is deficient and in need of relief. Considerations on an attempt to create a second memory.

-----

> (<b>9/8,3</b><a name="9_8,3"></a>) Geist im Kasten? Zuschauer kommen. Sie bekommen alles zu sehen, und nichts als das – wie beim Pornofilm. Und entsprechend ist die Enttäuschung.

Ghost in the box? Spectators visit. They get to see everything, and nothing but that - like in a porn movie. And the disappointment is correspondingly high.

-----

## Quest for Questions

If you have any questions on why I decided to translate the notes in a particular way please ask me in the forum comments below.

[Use the Luhmann's Zettelkasten forum category][luh-forum] to discuss all things Luhmann, including his Zettel, in more detail.

[luh-forum]: https://forum.zettelkasten.de/categories/project%3A-luhmann-s-zettelkasten

Commit message:

post: Ghost in the Box

content/posts/2022/10/luhmanns-zettel-translated.md, after:

---
title: "English Translation of All Notes on Zettelkasten by Luhmann"
created_at: 2022-10-31 08:45:02 +0100
updated_at: 2022-11-02 08:11:45 +0100
kind: article
author: sascha
tags: [ luhmann, translation ]
image: luhmann.png
description: "Faithful English translation of Niklas Luhmann's original notes on Zettelkasten."
---

I thought it would be nice if there was a common knowledge base on what Luhmann himself wrote on Zettelkasten. So here is a translation of all 18 notes of [the section 9/8 of his second Zettelkasten.](https://niklas-luhmann-archiv.de/bestand/zettelkasten/zettel/ZK_2_NB_9-8_V) I tried to find a middle ground between a translation that is faithful to his style, the nature of the German language, and the least ambigious English I can come up with.

If there is some dispute about a particular translation, I will highlight the dispute within the translation and will link to the post in the forums. [Participate in the forums!][luh-forum]

<%= insert_teaser_image caption: %Q{<a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=4529831">Luhmann.png</a> by <a href="//commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Sonntag&amp;amp;action=edit&amp;amp;redlink=1" class="new">Wikipedia User 'Sonntag'</a> (<a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0" title="Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0">CC BY-SA 3.0</a>)} %>

-----

> (<b>9/8</b><a name="9_8"></a>) Zettelkasten als kybernetisches System. Kombination von Unordnung und Ordnung, von Klumpenbildung und unvorhersehbarer, im ad hoc Zugriff realisierter Kombination. Vorbedingung: Verzicht auf festgelegte Ordnung. Die vorgeschaltete Differenzierung: Suchhilfen vs. Inhalt; Register, Fragestellungen, Einfälle vs. Vorhandenes überformt und macht z.T. entbehrlich, das, was an innerer Ordnung vorausgesetzt werden muss.

Zettelkasten as a cybernetic system. Combination of disorder and order, of lump formation, and unexpected, in ad hoc access realised combination. Prerequisite: Abandonment of fixed order. The upstream differentiation: Search aids vs content; index, questions, [spontaneous] ideas vs what already exists, reshapes and makes in part obsolete the inner order that must be assumed.

-----

> (<b>9/8a</b><a name="9_8a"></a>) Das Produktivitätsproblem muss in bezug auf eine Relation gestellt werden, nämlich in bezug auf die Relation von Zettelkasten und Benutzer.

The productivity problem has to be based on a relation, namely on the relation of Zettelkasten and user.

-----

> (<b>9/8a1</b><a name="9_8a1"></a>) Der Zettelkasten ist unaufhörlich gewachsen, und ich habe versucht, so gut ich konnte und soweit meine Fähigkeiten reichen, davon zu profitieren.

The Zettelkasten has grown incessantly, and I have tried, to the best of my ability, to profit from it.[^bobdoto]

[^bobdoto]: Translation improved by Bob Doto.

-----

> (<b>9/8a2</b><a name="9_8a2"></a>) Zettelkasten als Klärgrube – nicht nur abgeklärte Notizen hineintun. Aufschieben des Prüfens und Entscheidens – auch eine Tempofrage.

Zettelkasten as a septic tank -- don't put just treated notes in. Suspending of examination and decision making -- also a question of speed.

-----

> (<b>9/8b</b><a name="9_8b"></a>) Zur allg. Struktur von Gedächtnissen vgl. [Ashby 1967, S. 103](https://niklas-luhmann-archiv.de/bestand/literatur/item/ashby_1967_brain). Es ist danach wichtig, dass man nicht auf eine Unmenge von Punkt-für-Punkt Zugriffe angewiesen ist, sondern auf Relationen zwischen Notizen, also auf Verweisungen zurückgreifen kann, die mehr auf einmal verfügbar machen, als man bei einem Suchimpuls oder auch bei einer Gedankenfixierung im Sinn hat.

On the general organisation of memory see Ashby 1967, p103. It is therefore important that one is not dependent on a myriad of point-by-point accesses, but to be able to rely on relations between notes, i.e. on references that make more available at once than one has in mind when following a search impulse or fixating on a thought

-----

> (<b>9/8b1</b><a name="9_8b1"></a>) Wegen des vorstehenden Gesichtspunktes ist es wichtig, dass die Ordnung im Zettelkasten nicht nur unter Begriffen oder komplexen Einzelthemen aggregiert wird; obwohl das natürlich auch notwendig ist. Aber die Verweisungen dürfen nicht nur die Leitgesichtspunkte aggregierenden Sammelbegriffe erfassen, sondern müssen das unter ihnen gesammelte Material selektiv wegziehen.

Because of the previous point it is important that the order in the Zettelkasten is not aggregated merely under terms or complex single topics; although this is of course also necessary. But the connections shouldn't merely cover the leading points aggregating collective terms, but must selectively pull away the material collected under them.

-----

> (<b>9/8b2</b>) "Multiple storage" als Notwendigkeit der Speicherung von komplexen (komplex auszuwertenden) Informationen.

"Multiple storage" as the necessity of storing complex (to be evaluated in a complex way) information.

-----

> (<b>9/8c</b><a name="9_8c"></a>) Zu überlegen wäre etwas zum Problem der Interdependenzunterbrechung.

Something to consider would be the problem of interdependence interruption.

-----

> (<b>9/8d</b><a name="9_8d"></a>) Rückwirkungen auf die Lektüre: man liest anders, wenn man auf die Möglichkeiten der Verzettelung achtet – nicht: Exzerpte!

Feedback loop for reading: one reads differently if one is mindful of the possibilities of the Zettelkasten process - not: excerpts!

-----

> (<b>9/8e</b><a name="9_8e"></a>) Evtl. Rückgriff auf den Informationsbegriff, der Selektionshorizonte, Vergleichsschemata etc. voraussetzt, die nicht im Vorhinein festgelegt werden können. Daher wird der Zettelkasten produktiv insofern, als er Notiertes nichtmitnotierten Hintergründen aussetzt und dadurch Information entstehen lässt, die so nicht gespeichert war.

Possibly, recourse to the concept of information that presupposes selection horizons, comparison schemes, etc. which cannot be predetermined. Therefore, the Zettelkasten becomes productive as it exposes what is noted to what is not noted and thus allows the formation of information that was not stored in this way.

-----

> (<b>9/8f</b><a name="9_8f"></a>) Einheitlicher Effekt entsteht bei Kanalisierung in appropriate ways in das soziale System. Eindruck einer geistig muskulösen Gesamtpersönlichkeit.

A unified effect is created when channeling in appropriate ways into the social system. Impression of a mentally muscular overall personality.

-----

> (<b>9/8g</b>) Hinter der Zettelkastentechnik steht die Erfahrung: Ohne zu schreiben kann man nicht denken – jedenfalls nicht in anspruchsvollen, selektiven Zugriff aufs Gedächtnis voraussehenden Zusammenhängen. Das heißt auch: ohne Differenzen einzukerben, kann man nicht denken.

The Zettelkasten Method is based on this experience: One cannot think without writing - at least not in demanding contexts that anticipate selective access to memory. This also means: without notching differences one cannot think.

-----

> (<b>9/8h</b><a name="9_8h"></a>) Bemerkungen über Registrierung des Wissens in der Royal Society bei Sprat 1667, S. 115f. Verzicht auf vorschnelle Systematisierung und Abschliessung, Zukunftsoffenheit: "Nor ought this neglect of consequence and order, to be only thought to proceed from their carelessness; but from mature and well grounded premeditation."

Comments on registration of knowledge in the Royal Society in Sprat 1667, p. 115f. Abandonment of hasty systematization and closure, openness to the future: "Nor ought this neglect of consequence and order, to be only thought to proceed from their carelessness; but from mature and well grounded premeditation."

-----

> (<b>9/8i</b><a name="9_8i"></a>) Zettelkasten mit dem komplizierten Verdauungssystem eines Wiederkäuers. Alle arbiträren Einfälle, alle Zufälle der Lektüren, können eingebracht werden. Es entscheidet dann die interne Anschlussfähigkeit.

Zettelkasten with the complicated digestive system of a ruminant. All arbitrary ideas, all coincidences of readings, can be brought in. The internal connectivity then decides.

-----

> (<b>9/8j</b><a name="9_8j"></a>) Im Zettelkasten ist ein Zettel, der das Argument enthält, das die Behauptungen auf allen anderen Zetteln widerlegt. Aber dieser Zettel verschwindet, sobald man den Zettelkasten aufzieht. D.h. er nimmt eine andere Nummer an, verstellt sich und ist dann nicht zu finden. Ein Joker.

There is a note in the Zettelkasten that contains the argument that refutes the claims on every other note. But this note disappears as soon as one opens the Zettelkasten. I.e. it appropriates a different number, changes position (or: disguises itself) and is then not to be found. A joker.

-----

> (<b>9/8,1</b><a name="9_8,1"></a>) Thema: Kommunikation mit dem Zettelkasten: Wie kommt man zu einem adaequaten Partner, Junior-Partner? – wichtig, nachdem das Arbeiten mit Personal immer schwieriger und immer teurer wird. Zettels Wirklichkeit

Topic: Communication with the Zettelkasten: How to get an adequate partner, junior partner? -- important after working with staff becomes more and more difficult and expensive. Zettel's reality

-----

> (<b>9/8,2</b><a name="9_8,2"></a>) Personal ist schon lange knapp und teuer, jetzt wird es zusätzlich ungebärdig und unleitbar. Die Mikroprozessoren sind angekündigt, aber noch nicht wirklich verfügbar. Das eigene Gedächtnis mangelhaft und entlastungsbedürftig. Überlegungen zu einem Versuch, sich ein Zweitgedächtnis zu schaffen.

Personnel has been scarce and expensive for a long time, now it additionally becomes unruly and unmanageable. Microprocessors have been announced, but are not really available yet. One's own memory is deficient and in need of relief. Considerations on an attempt to create a second memory.

-----

> (<b>9/8,3</b><a name="9_8,3"></a>) Geist im Kasten? Zuschauer kommen. Sie bekommen alles zu sehen, und nichts als das – wie beim Pornofilm. Und entsprechend ist die Enttäuschung.

Ghost in the box? Spectators visit. They get to see everything, and nothing but that - like in a porn movie. And the disappointment is correspondingly high.

-- For a detailed exploration, check out: ["Philosophy of Zettelkasten: What is the Ghost in the Box?"](/posts/ghost-in-the-box/)

-----

## Quest for Questions

If you have any questions on why I decided to translate the notes in a particular way please ask me in the forum comments below.

[Use the Luhmann's Zettelkasten forum category][luh-forum] to discuss all things Luhmann, including his Zettel, in more detail.

[luh-forum]: https://forum.zettelkasten.de/categories/project%3A-luhmann-s-zettelkasten
