content/folgezettel/index.md, before:

---
title: Folgezettel
created_at: 2022-02-22 13:55:00 +0100
updated_at: 2022-02-28 20:30:53 +0100
kind: article
description: "Overview of debates and arguments around the topic of 'Folgezettel'."
discussion_id: 2152
comments: true
---

On this page, we provide an overview of what came to be known as *The Great Folgezettel Debate* and its follow-up discussions.

For all intents and purposes, we often translate the German word "Folgezettel" as "sequence of notes".

We're writing this overview in the open. If you come across any relevant resource or piece of discussion you want to share, [contribute to the forum discussion][forum] or [email us][contact]

## *The Great Folgezettel Debate* Timeline

- Daniel Lüdecke's original post; German original: ["Luhmanns Arbeitsweise im elektronischen Zettelkasten"](https://strengejacke.wordpress.com/2015/09/08/luhmanns-arbeitsweise-im-elektronischen-zettelkasten/)
- Sascha's reaction: ["No, Luhmann was not about Folgezettel"](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/luhmann-folgezettel-truth/)
- Daniel Lüdecke then replied: ["You Underestimate the Power of the Dark Folgezettel"](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/luedeckes-follow-up/)

## Understanding Folgezettel

- ["Different Kinds of Ties Between Notes"](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/kinds-of-ties/)
- ["Understanding Hierarchy by Translating Folgezettel and Structure Zettel"](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/understanding-hierarchy-translating-folgezettel/)
- @ZettelDistractions's [Mathematical Definition of Folgezettel](https://forum.zettelkasten.de/discussion/1982/mathematical-definition-of-folgezettel/p1), a work-in-progress piece.
- @iamaustinha's ["Using Cartography as a Metaphor for Investigating the Great Folgezettel Debate"](https://forum.zettelkasten.de/discussion/2148/using-cartography-as-a-metaphor-for-investigating-the-great-folgezettel-debate)
- [All our posts and videos tagged #folgezettel](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/tags/folgezettel/)
- [Backwards Compatible Folgezettel ID format for Zettlr](https://forum.zettelkasten.de/discussion/comment/14575/#Comment_14575)
- [The Folgezettel Conundrum](https://medium.com/@ethomasv/the-folgezettel-conundrum-20b14dc986ec)

[contact]: https://zettelkasten.de/legal/#contact
[forum]: https://forum.zettelkasten.de/discussion/2152/

Commit message:

link to new post in /folgezettel

content/folgezettel/index.md, after:

---
title: Folgezettel
created_at: 2022-02-22 13:55:00 +0100
updated_at: 2022-02-28 20:30:53 +0100
kind: article
description: "Overview of debates and arguments around the topic of 'Folgezettel'."
discussion_id: 2152
comments: true
---

On this page, we provide an overview of what came to be known as *The Great Folgezettel Debate* and its follow-up discussions.

For all intents and purposes, we often translate the German word "Folgezettel" as "sequence of notes".

We're writing this overview in the open. If you come across any relevant resource or piece of discussion you want to share, [contribute to the forum discussion][forum] or [email us][contact]

## *The Great Folgezettel Debate* Timeline

- Daniel Lüdecke's original post; German original: ["Luhmanns Arbeitsweise im elektronischen Zettelkasten"](https://strengejacke.wordpress.com/2015/09/08/luhmanns-arbeitsweise-im-elektronischen-zettelkasten/)
- Sascha's reaction: ["No, Luhmann was not about Folgezettel"](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/luhmann-folgezettel-truth/)
- Daniel Lüdecke then replied: ["You Underestimate the Power of the Dark Folgezettel"](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/luedeckes-follow-up/)
- To which Sascha countered: ["No, I Do Not Underestimate the Power of the Dark Folgezettel – I Embrace Its Source of Power"](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/embrace-dark-folgezettel-power/)

## Understanding Folgezettel

- ["Different Kinds of Ties Between Notes"](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/kinds-of-ties/)
- ["Understanding Hierarchy by Translating Folgezettel and Structure Zettel"](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/understanding-hierarchy-translating-folgezettel/)
- @ZettelDistractions's [Mathematical Definition of Folgezettel](https://forum.zettelkasten.de/discussion/1982/mathematical-definition-of-folgezettel/p1), a work-in-progress piece.
- @iamaustinha's ["Using Cartography as a Metaphor for Investigating the Great Folgezettel Debate"](https://forum.zettelkasten.de/discussion/2148/using-cartography-as-a-metaphor-for-investigating-the-great-folgezettel-debate)
- [All our posts and videos tagged #folgezettel](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/tags/folgezettel/)
- [Backwards Compatible Folgezettel ID format for Zettlr](https://forum.zettelkasten.de/discussion/comment/14575/#Comment_14575)
- [The Folgezettel Conundrum](https://medium.com/@ethomasv/the-folgezettel-conundrum-20b14dc986ec)

[contact]: https://zettelkasten.de/legal/#contact
[forum]: https://forum.zettelkasten.de/discussion/2152/
