content/course/index.md, before:

---
title: "The Zettelkasten Method 101 LIVE Workshop"
layout: plain
bodyclass: online-course
created_at: 2024-01-10 11:50:00 +0100
description: "Next cohort in January 2024 (SOLD OUT): Zettelkasten Method 101, Mastering the basics to unlock your Integrated Thinking Environment. A live workshop for 10 participants."
updated_at: 2024-01-23 13:06:16 +0100
---
## Mastering the Basics to Unlock Your Integrated Thinking Environment

By learning and applying the Zettelkasten Method, you will be equipped with *the most powerful tool* to solve modern problems of knowledge:

- Become a *life-long* learner.
- Produce *high-quality* content: blog posts, presentations, podcasts.
- Come up with *solutions*, like developing marketing campaigns or business strategies.
- Get an edge by becoming an early adopter.

<aside class="note"><p>The January cohort is sold out</p></aside>

## About the Course Content

This course will give everything you need to start building a Zettelkasten and way more. There will be no filler material about the history of the method or esoteric babble that obscures the practical side.

This course is about **doing** and **accomplishing**.

### 1\. Introduction

After this session, you understand what makes the Zettelkasten Method uniquely powerful and kick-started your Zettelkasten.

1. First and second principles of the Zettelkasten Method.
2. How to Create Value with each step of the process.
3. Create your Zettelkasten now

### 2\. Creating Good Notes

After this session, you create notes that will be actually valuable knowledge and not just dead information.

1. Atomic Note-Taking.
2. Value-creating Note-Taking.
3. Connecting ideas.

### 3\. Value-Creating by Integrating Notes Into Your Zettelkasten

After this session, you turn pesky formalities into learning opportunities.

1. Creating titles.
2. Creating tags.
3. Creating summaries.
4. Creating references.

### 4\. Creating Structure

After this session, you wield control over your notes independent of the size of your Zettelkasten.

1. Creating Access Points to Your Knowledge.
2. Creating Toolboxes for Learning and Creating.
3. Creating Thinking Canvases.

### 5\. Using the Zettelkasten

After this session, you use your Zettelkasten for real-world results.

1. Writing Articles, Creating Presentations, and more.
2. Using Your Zettelkasten for Personal Development.
3. Using Your Zettelkasten to Learn.


## Time, Energy, Price

The course consists of 6 sessions, each lasting 120 minutes. The first 5 are structured, the last one will be an open consulting session to close all the open loops and answer open questions.

The course is limited to 10 participants at a time. The next cohort will start end of January.

Make sure to [subscribe to our newsletter](/newsletter) to keep updated.

The price for the course is €299 (US$329).

The schedule is:

- 27. Jan 2024 at 16:00 to 18:00, CET ([in your timezone](https://time.is/1600_27_jan_2024_in_bielefeld))
- 3. Feb 2024 at 16:00 to 18:00, CET ([in your timezone](https://time.is/1600_3_feb_2024_in_bielefeld))
- 10. Feb 2024 at 16:00 to 18:00, CET ([in your timezone](https://time.is/1600_10_feb_2024_in_bielefeld))
- 17. Feb 2024 at 16:00 to 18:00, CET ([in your timezone](https://time.is/1600_17_feb_2024_in_bielefeld))
- 24. Feb 2024 at 16:00 to 18:00, CET ([in your timezone](https://time.is/1600_24_feb_2024_in_bielefeld))
- 2. Mar 2024 at 16:00 to 18:00, CET ([in your timezone](https://time.is/1600_2_mar_2024_in_bielefeld))

<aside class="note"><p>The January cohort is sold out</p></aside>

## About Me as a Teacher and My Zettelkasten

Expect me to be

1. Intense
2. Involved
3. Demanding
4. Very Generous with my Energy and Time (thanks Nir for this compliment!) when you put in your effort.

I am using my Zettelkasten and develop the method for over a decade now. I am a coach for health and fitness for 15 years. Expect a coach who has a lot of experience and is a seasoned Zettelkasten practitioner himself.

If you have further questions, feel free to email me: <%= email("saschafast@gmail.com", subject: "ZK 101 Workshop Question", text: "Send an Email") %>


## FAQ

### When will I be able to sign up?

To get notified when the doors open, sign up to the newsletter [here](https://zettelkasten.de/newsletter).

### I'm poor/a student/a teacher, do I get a discount?

There are no discounts.

### Will there be recordings?

If you can't attend to a session, I will make the session recording available to you.

### I don't live in your timezone. Can I still attend?

The workshop will be on Saturdays so you more likely be able to attend. The time for the first cohort will be around 4pm CET/CEST.

### Will I need to use The Archive?

No, the workshop is software-independent, so you practice the principles, not the tools.

### Which software will we use?

You can use whatever software you like. I will use *The Archive* for demonstration purposes.

----

Do you have more questions? Reach out via email:
<%= email("saschafast@gmail.com", subject: "ZK 101 Workshop Question", text: "Ask via email") %>

Commit message:

zk 101: add March cohort announcement

content/course/index.md, after:

---
title: "The Zettelkasten Method 101 LIVE Workshop"
layout: plain
bodyclass: online-course
created_at: 2024-01-10 11:50:00 +0100
description: "Next cohort in March 2024: Zettelkasten Method 101, Mastering the basics to unlock your Integrated Thinking Environment. A live workshop for 10 participants."
updated_at: 2024-02-08 12:28:16 +0100
---
## Mastering the Basics to Unlock Your Integrated Thinking Environment

By learning and applying the Zettelkasten Method, you will be equipped with *the most powerful tool* to solve modern problems of knowledge:

- Become a *life-long* learner.
- Produce *high-quality* content: blog posts, presentations, podcasts.
- Come up with *solutions*, like developing marketing campaigns or business strategies.
- Get an edge by becoming an early adopter.

<%= email("saschafast@gmail.com", subject: "ZK 101 Workshop Pre-Sale", message: "Hi Sascha!\n\nI am [YOUR NAME] and I want to secure a spot for the ZK 101 live workshop.\n\nPlease send a payment request for the EUR 299 / USD 329!".uri_encoded, classes: "coaching__action", text: "Secure a spot now") %>

## About the Course Content

This course will give everything you need to start building a Zettelkasten and way more. There will be no filler material about the history of the method or esoteric babble that obscures the practical side.

This course is about **doing** and **accomplishing**.

### 1\. Introduction

After this session, you understand what makes the Zettelkasten Method uniquely powerful and kick-started your Zettelkasten.

1. First and second principles of the Zettelkasten Method.
2. How to Create Value with each step of the process.
3. Create your Zettelkasten now

### 2\. Creating Good Notes

After this session, you create notes that will be actually valuable knowledge and not just dead information.

1. Atomic Note-Taking.
2. Value-creating Note-Taking.
3. Connecting ideas.

### 3\. Value-Creating by Integrating Notes Into Your Zettelkasten

After this session, you turn pesky formalities into learning opportunities.

1. Creating titles.
2. Creating tags.
3. Creating summaries.
4. Creating references.

### 4\. Creating Structure

After this session, you wield control over your notes independent of the size of your Zettelkasten.

1. Creating Access Points to Your Knowledge.
2. Creating Toolboxes for Learning and Creating.
3. Creating Thinking Canvases.

### 5\. Using the Zettelkasten

After this session, you use your Zettelkasten for real-world results.

1. Writing Articles, Creating Presentations, and more.
2. Using Your Zettelkasten for Personal Development.
3. Using Your Zettelkasten to Learn.


## Time, Energy, Price

The course consists of 6 sessions, each lasting 120 minutes. The first 5 are structured, the last one will be an open consulting session to close all the open loops and answer open questions.

The course is limited to 10 participants at a time. The next cohort will start end of March.

Make sure to [subscribe to our newsletter](/newsletter) to keep updated.

The price for the course is €299 (US$329).

Next cohort starts at the end of March. Exact date will be announced.

<%= email("saschafast@gmail.com", subject: "ZK 101 Workshop Pre-Sale", message: "Hi Sascha!\n\nI am [YOUR NAME] and I want to secure a spot for the ZK 101 live workshop.\n\nPlease send a payment request for the EUR 299 / USD 329!".uri_encoded, classes: "coaching__action", text: "Secure a spot now") %>


## About Me as a Teacher and My Zettelkasten

Expect me to be

1. Intense
2. Involved
3. Demanding
4. Very Generous with my Energy and Time (thanks Nir for this compliment!) when you put in your effort.

I am using my Zettelkasten and develop the method for over a decade now. I am a coach for health and fitness for 15 years. Expect a coach who has a lot of experience and is a seasoned Zettelkasten practitioner himself.

If you have further questions, feel free to email me: <%= email("saschafast@gmail.com", subject: "ZK 101 Workshop Question", text: "Send an Email") %>


## FAQ

### What's the upcoming March cohort schedule?

To be announced!

### What's the current January cohort schedule?

The schedule of the current cohort (January 2024) is:

- 27. Jan 2024 at 16:00 to 18:00, CET ([in your timezone](https://time.is/1600_27_jan_2024_in_bielefeld))
- 3. Feb 2024 at 16:00 to 18:00, CET ([in your timezone](https://time.is/1600_3_feb_2024_in_bielefeld))
- 10. Feb 2024 at 16:00 to 18:00, CET ([in your timezone](https://time.is/1600_10_feb_2024_in_bielefeld))
- 17. Feb 2024 at 16:00 to 18:00, CET ([in your timezone](https://time.is/1600_17_feb_2024_in_bielefeld))
- 24. Feb 2024 at 16:00 to 18:00, CET ([in your timezone](https://time.is/1600_24_feb_2024_in_bielefeld))
- 2. Mar 2024 at 16:00 to 18:00, CET ([in your timezone](https://time.is/1600_2_mar_2024_in_bielefeld))

### When will I be able to sign up?

To get notified when the doors open, sign up to the newsletter [here](https://zettelkasten.de/newsletter).

### I'm poor/a student/a teacher, do I get a discount?

We don't offer discounts for this course at the moment.

### Will there be recordings?

If you can't attend to a session, I will make the session recording available to you.

### I don't live in your timezone. Can I still attend?

The workshop will be on Saturdays so you more likely be able to attend. The time for the first cohort will be around 4pm CET/CEST.

### Will I need to use The Archive?

No, the workshop is software-independent, so you practice the principles, not the tools.

### Which software will we use?

You can use whatever software you like. I will use *The Archive* for demonstration purposes.

----

Do you have more questions? Reach out via email:
<%= email("saschafast@gmail.com", subject: "ZK 101 Workshop Question", text: "Ask via email") %>
