content/legal/index.md, before:

---
title: Contact and Legal Information
layout: plain
toc: true
bodyclass: contact
updated_at: 2023-12-08 12:12:20 +0100
---

{{toc}}


## Contact ##

If you have any questions about the Zettelkasten Method, please <a href="https://forum.zettelkasten.de/">ask on the forums</a>: We want everyone to learn and benefit from questions!

<aside class="note">
    <p>Please note that Christian and Sascha are not available for public software reviews in accordance with their <a href="/our-software-review-policy/">software review principle</a>.</p>
</aside>

Find Christian at <a href="http://christiantietze.de" title="Christian Tietze">his website</a>.
You can contact Christian on
<a href="https://twitter.com/ctietze">Twitter</a>.
You could also simply <%=email("hi@christiantietze.de", text: "drop an e-mail")%>.

The only way to contact Sascha is <%=email("saschafast@gmail.com", text: "via email")%> or via his <a href="http://saschafast.de" lang="de">homepage</a>. He does not use social media.

We love to be hearing from you!

<small><a href="/">&larr; Back to Main Page</a></small>


## Legal Notice ##

Responsible for the contents of this website, according to 55 Abs. 2 RStV:

<p class="vcard">
  <span class="fn"><a href="mailto:christian.tietze@gmail.com" class="email">Christian Tietze</a></span><br/>
  <span class="adr home"><span class="street-address">Dostalstr. 18</span><br/>
  <span class="postal-code">D-33605</span> <span class="locality">Bielefeld</span></span><br/>
  <span class="mobile">+49 177 6467763</span>
</p>

Our web pages and their contents are subject to German copyrigth law. Except where otherwise noted, content on this site is licensed <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/">CC-BY-SA</a>.



## Disclaimer ##

### Accountability for Content ###

The contents of our pages have been created with the utmost care. However, we cannot guarantee the contents’ accuracy, completeness or topicality. According to statutory provisions, we are furthermore responsible for our own content on these web pages. In this context, please note that we are accordingly not obliged to monitor merely the transmitted or saved information of third parties, or investigate circumstances pointing to illegal activity. Our obligations to remove or block the use of information under generally applicable laws remain unaffected by this as per §§ 8 to 10 of the Telemedia Act (TMG).

### Accountability for Links ###

Responsibility for the content of external links (to web pages of third parties) lies solely with the operators of the linked pages. No violations were evident to us at the time of linking. Should any legal infringement become known to us, we will remove the respective link immediately.



## MailChimp Newsletter ##

We use a 3rd party service to deliver our newsletter emails, because our email provider would kill us if we sent emails through our personal accounts to all our subscribers at once. We picked MailChimp for the job.

MailChimp stores your contact information for us. When you sign up to our newsletter, you acknowledge that the information you provide will be transferred to MailChimp for processing in accordance with their [Privacy Policy](https://mailchimp.com/legal/privacy/) and [Terms](https://mailchimp.com/legal/terms/). (We are showing this info next to our signup forms again, so no need to memorize this!)

You can unsubscribe anytime from the emails themselves, or [via this web form.](https://christiantietze.us5.list-manage.com/unsubscribe?u=9aad95d757e454078fe42ae23&id=d06cc48a0f)



## Forum and Comments ##

We use cookies to store your login information on the forums. We do not use any other tracking service on the website, but we do forward anonymous statistics to our forum vendors.

The forum is _public._ Your forum user name and profile picture is visible to everyone, including search engines. Only Sascha and Christian have access to your private information: your email and IP. While we value authenticity in this community, it might be a good idea to not use your real name as user name.

Tell us if you want your forum account and posts to be removed.

### Gravatar ###

From your email address, the forum creates an anonymous string of characters (aka a "hash") that is passed to Gravatar to display a forum avatar for you. If you don't have an account with them, they will not be able to tell your email address this way. See <a href="https://automattic.com/privacy/">Gravatar's privacy policy</a>.

### Disqus (our old commenting system) ###

The old comment form was powered by Disqus, and your login for them are handled by Disqus, not us. See <a href="https://help.disqus.com/terms-and-policies">Disqus' terms and polcies</a> to which you'll have to agree separately before they start collecting your login information.</p>


## Website Metrics and Visitor Statistics

We use TelemetryDeck to collect anonymized usage data. This helps us understand where visitors come from and which articles are popular.

TelemetryDeck does not collect any personally identifiable information. We don't know who you are and if you re-visit, and neither does TelemetryDeck. You can read more about TelemetryDeck’s privacy policy at <https://telemetrydeck.com/privacy>


## Cookies and Tracking Pixel ##

### VG Wort Website Hit Tracking ###

We do use session-cookies of <a href="http://vgwort.de/">VG Wort</a> in Munich to let them measure how many people read our articles. We get compensated when we hit a threshold per post. The money comes from a "tax" e.g. printer manufacturers have to pay (see the <a href="https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verwertungsgesellschaft_Wort">German Wikipedia</a> for info). The usage of this cookie is in accordance with Art. 6 Paragraph 1 DSGVO (aka GDPR). The data handling is actually done by INFOnline GmbH, Bonn, Germany. You can <a href="http://optout.ioam.de">opt-out completely</a> by having them set an opt-out cookie, affecting all (German) websites participating in the.


### Amazon Affiliate-Links ###

Links to Amazon.com are affiliate links. When you click on these, the shop will give us a share of a few % for any product you buy. This does cost you nothing. Using these links does not set any cookies or transfer your IP. Only when you click on them and visit their shop will Amazon know about you. On their pages, the <a href="https://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html/ref=footer_privacy?ie=UTF8&nodeId=468496">privacy policies of Amazon</a> apply.


### External Content ###

External fonts are served by Google Fonts. <a href="https://developers.google.com/fonts/faq#what_does_using_the_google_fonts_api_mean_for_the_privacy_of_my_users">According to them,</a> (2018-05-26) they do not set cookies during the process. Also, when the fonts are loaded from their server, the result will be cached by your browser for a year without your computer reaching out to their server again.


### Server Log Files ###

Our web server automatically collects data for every page you visit as you visit it. Your browser transmits this data, and you can control this from your browser or via plugins, if you want.

The log files on our server include:

- browser name and version
- your computer's operating system
- the referrer URL
- the host name
- the time of access
- your IP address

This data is not combined with anything else and never shared. We just use it to count website visitors. This is in accordance with Art. 6 Paragraph 1 DSGVO (aka GDPR).

Commit message:

update privacy policy for Sendy

content/legal/index.md, after:

---
title: Contact and Legal Information
layout: plain
toc: true
bodyclass: contact
updated_at: 2023-12-08 12:12:20 +0100
---

{{toc}}


## Contact ##

If you have any questions about the Zettelkasten Method, please <a href="https://forum.zettelkasten.de/">ask on the forums</a>: We want everyone to learn and benefit from questions!

<aside class="note">
    <p>Please note that Christian and Sascha are not available for public software reviews in accordance with their <a href="/our-software-review-policy/">software review principle</a>.</p>
</aside>

Find Christian at <a href="http://christiantietze.de" title="Christian Tietze">his website</a>.
You can contact Christian on
<a href="https://twitter.com/ctietze">Twitter</a>.
You could also simply <%=email("hi@christiantietze.de", text: "drop an e-mail")%>.

The only way to contact Sascha is <%=email("saschafast@gmail.com", text: "via email")%> or via his <a href="http://saschafast.de" lang="de">homepage</a>. He does not use social media.

We love to be hearing from you!

<small><a href="/">&larr; Back to Main Page</a></small>


## Legal Notice ##

Responsible for the contents of this website, according to 55 Abs. 2 RStV:

<p class="vcard">
  <span class="fn"><a href="mailto:christian.tietze@gmail.com" class="email">Christian Tietze</a></span><br/>
  <span class="adr home"><span class="street-address">Dostalstr. 18</span><br/>
  <span class="postal-code">D-33605</span> <span class="locality">Bielefeld</span></span><br/>
  <span class="mobile">+49 177 6467763</span>
</p>

Our web pages and their contents are subject to German copyrigth law. Except where otherwise noted, content on this site is licensed <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/">CC-BY-SA</a>.



## Disclaimer ##

### Accountability for Content ###

The contents of our pages have been created with the utmost care. However, we cannot guarantee the contents’ accuracy, completeness or topicality. According to statutory provisions, we are furthermore responsible for our own content on these web pages. In this context, please note that we are accordingly not obliged to monitor merely the transmitted or saved information of third parties, or investigate circumstances pointing to illegal activity. Our obligations to remove or block the use of information under generally applicable laws remain unaffected by this as per §§ 8 to 10 of the Telemedia Act (TMG).

### Accountability for Links ###

Responsibility for the content of external links (to web pages of third parties) lies solely with the operators of the linked pages. No violations were evident to us at the time of linking. Should any legal infringement become known to us, we will remove the respective link immediately.



## Newsletter ##

We use a service to deliver our newsletter emails, because our email provider would kill us if we sent emails through our personal accounts to all our subscribers at once.

We host the newsletter service ourselves so your data isn't shared with data hoarders. The emails are actually sent via Amazon's _Simple Email Service_, using the data center in Frankfurt. During transmit, the recipient email will be known to Amazon. We don't store anythin in the Amazon Cloud, though.

You can unsubscribe anytime: each email has a link to unsubscribe. Or do it [via this web form.](https://zettelkasten.de/newsletter/unsubscribe)



## Forum and Comments ##

We use cookies to store your login information on the forums. We do not use any other tracking service on the website, but we do forward anonymous statistics to our forum vendors.

The forum is _public._ Your forum user name and profile picture is visible to everyone, including search engines. Only Sascha and Christian have access to your private information: your email and IP. While we value authenticity in this community, it might be a good idea to not use your real name as user name.

Tell us if you want your forum account and posts to be removed.

### Gravatar ###

From your email address, the forum creates an anonymous string of characters (aka a "hash") that is passed to Gravatar to display a forum avatar for you. If you don't have an account with them, they will not be able to tell your email address this way. See <a href="https://automattic.com/privacy/">Gravatar's privacy policy</a>.

### Disqus (our old commenting system) ###

The old comment form was powered by Disqus, and your login for them are handled by Disqus, not us. See <a href="https://help.disqus.com/terms-and-policies">Disqus' terms and polcies</a> to which you'll have to agree separately before they start collecting your login information.</p>


## Website Metrics and Visitor Statistics

We use TelemetryDeck to collect anonymized usage data. This helps us understand where visitors come from and which articles are popular.

TelemetryDeck does not collect any personally identifiable information. We don't know who you are and if you re-visit, and neither does TelemetryDeck. You can read more about TelemetryDeck’s privacy policy at <https://telemetrydeck.com/privacy>


## Cookies and Tracking Pixel ##

### VG Wort Website Hit Tracking ###

We do use session-cookies of <a href="http://vgwort.de/">VG Wort</a> in Munich to let them measure how many people read our articles. We get compensated when we hit a threshold per post. The money comes from a "tax" e.g. printer manufacturers have to pay (see the <a href="https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verwertungsgesellschaft_Wort">German Wikipedia</a> for info). The usage of this cookie is in accordance with Art. 6 Paragraph 1 DSGVO (aka GDPR). The data handling is actually done by INFOnline GmbH, Bonn, Germany. You can <a href="http://optout.ioam.de">opt-out completely</a> by having them set an opt-out cookie, affecting all (German) websites participating in the.


### Amazon Affiliate-Links ###

Links to Amazon.com are affiliate links. When you click on these, the shop will give us a share of a few % for any product you buy. This does cost you nothing. Using these links does not set any cookies or transfer your IP. Only when you click on them and visit their shop will Amazon know about you. On their pages, the <a href="https://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html/ref=footer_privacy?ie=UTF8&nodeId=468496">privacy policies of Amazon</a> apply.


### External Content ###

External fonts are served by Google Fonts. <a href="https://developers.google.com/fonts/faq#what_does_using_the_google_fonts_api_mean_for_the_privacy_of_my_users">According to them,</a> (2018-05-26) they do not set cookies during the process. Also, when the fonts are loaded from their server, the result will be cached by your browser for a year without your computer reaching out to their server again.


### Server Log Files ###

Our web server automatically collects data for every page you visit as you visit it. Your browser transmits this data, and you can control this from your browser or via plugins, if you want.

The log files on our server include:

- browser name and version
- your computer's operating system
- the referrer URL
- the host name
- the time of access
- your IP address

This data is not combined with anything else and never shared. We just use it to count website visitors. This is in accordance with Art. 6 Paragraph 1 DSGVO (aka GDPR).
