content/posts/overview.md, before:

---
title: Overview
updated_at: 2019-11-20 11:43:00 +0100
toc: true
---

{{toc}}

**********

So you're here for a starting point.

Using a Zettelkasten is about optimizing a workflow of learning and producing knowledge. The products are texts, mostly. The categories we find fit the process well at the moment are the following:

* _Knowledge Management_:  general information about what it means to work and learn efficiently.
* _Writing_:  posts on the production of lasting knowledge, and about sharing it with others through your own texts.
* _Reading_:  posts about the process of acquisition of new things and the organization of sources.

We started to feature application reviews to see how well they fit the Zettelkasten workflow. You most likely want to pick an app that adapts well to your work, so our [tools page](/tools/), the [list of blog posts tagged "review"](/posts/tags/review), and our [software forum](https://forum.zettelkasten.de/categories/tools) are all good starting points. There's a lot of other software on the web you could experiment with, so don't feel limited to our selection!

If you want to know more about us and how we roll, take a look at [the "personal" tag](/posts/tags/personal/).

## Getting Started

* [How many Zettelkästen should I have?](/posts/how-many-zettelkasten/) The answer is, most likely, only one for the duration of your life. But there are exceptions to this rule.
* [Don't use categories.](/posts/no-categories/) Use tags instead.
* "What should my first note be?" -- [it doesn't matter.](/posts/your-first-note/) Just get started.
* [Set links between notes.](/posts/search-alone-is-not-enough) Full-text search on its own provides not enough information. Connections will do, especially in the long run.
* ["When should I start a new note?"](/posts/when-start-new-note/)
    * Also read ["Trust the process"](/posts/trust-the-process-nickmilo22/), an essay.
* You have to [interpret your sources](/posts/dont-rely-on-source-have-faith-in-yourself/) and then rely on your own thoughts henceforth to get the maximum benefit. Collecting information does not increase your knowledge.
* [Use outlines](/posts/how-i-use-outlines-to-write-any-text/) to start with the first draft of your writing project.
* Then [ease into writing](/posts/ease-into-writing/) by adding Zettel notes to the outline, pasting their contents in. 

<%# <!--ct: keep in sync with content/posts/2015/07/getting-started.txt --> %>

## Principles

> Principles are higher than techniques. Principles produce techniques in an instant.  
> ---Ido Portal

* [Principle of Atomicity](/posts/create-zettel-from-reading-notes/): put things that belong together into a single note, [give it an ID](/posts/add-identity/), but limit its content to that single topic.
* Our post about the [Principle of Connectivity](/posts/luhmann-folgezettel-truth/) highlights how different techniques can implement the same underlying principle, here links vs Folgezettel to connect notes. Also see a discussion about [Different Kinds of Ties Between Notes](/posts/kinds-of-ties/).

## Knowledge Management

[The building blocks of a Zettelkasten](/posts/zettelkasten-building-blocks/) are the **inbox**, the **note archive**, and the **reference manager**.

These are the basics to get started with effective knowledge management:

* [Use a real notebook](/posts/use-real-notebook/) to capture thoughts.
* Write notes for your note archive [in a way you understand later.](/posts/how-to-write-notes-you-can-understand/)
* [Add Identity](/posts/add-identity/) to things in the system to make references possible.
* [Don't use categories.](/posts/no-categories/) Use tags instead.
    * [Good and bad tags](/posts/object-tags-vs-topic-tags/) explained: some tagging habits will get in your way eventually.
* [Set links between notes.](/posts/search-alone-is-not-enough) Search alone is not enough.
* Every Zettel has two forms: [an inner and outer form](/posts/zettel-nature-two-forms/).

And always keep in mind [The Collector's Fallacy](/posts/collectors-fallacy/): you have to work with new material to really learn it. It doesn't suffice to bookmark websites or just read and annotate books. (Christian still has [skeletons in the closet](/posts/collectors-fallacy-confession/).)

To get you in the mood to grow your archive, read ["Trust the process"](/posts/trust-the-process-nickmilo22/), an essay.

### Scaling your note archive

To cope with the constant influx of new information, [use temporary "buffer" notes](/posts/buffer-notes/) to collect stuff that you can later re-arrange.

With time, you'll notice multiple [Layers of Evidence](/posts/layers-of-evidence/) emerge. This means your notes will have different kinds of content. The layers are:

1. Data description and patterns.
2. Interpretation of descriptions and patterns.
3. Synthesis of patterns, descriptions and interpretation.

When your archive grows, you'll add [Structural Layers in your Zettelkasten](/posts/three-layers-structure-zettelkasten/) through links. The levels are:

1. Bottom Layer: Content
2. Middle Layer: Structure Notes
3. Top Layer: Main Structure Notes and Double Hashes (that is: special tags)

### About learning and knowing-more in general

["Trust the process"](/posts/trust-the-process-nickmilo22/) (an essay) hits the nerve: thinking and memory retention are improved by working through problems.

* [A Zettelkasten improves your thinking and writing](/posts/zettelkasten-improves-thinking-writing/) because it surprises us when we search for something. 
* [A Zettelkasten extends your mind and memory](/posts/extend-your-mind-and-memory-with-a-zettelkasten/) because its structure mimics the way your brain works.
* [Learn faster](/posts/learn-faster-by-writing-zettel-notes/): get coverage with good reading techniques, get practice by writing Zettel notes, and gain insights by connecting notes to your web of knowledge.
* You have to [interpret your sources](/posts/dont-rely-on-source-have-faith-in-yourself/) and then rely on your own thoughts henceforth to get the maximum benefit.

## Writing

* [Make writing a part of your identity](/posts/identity-schedule-serious-writing/). This requires to schedule time for writing, and to create lasting habits.
* How to become a better writer:
    * A [daily writing practice](/posts/useful-daily-writing-practice/) will help lower the hurdle to get started, for example.
    * [How to track your writing progress](/posts/how-to-track-writing-progress/) -- define metrics and find out how well you perform.
    * [Counting your words](/posts/count-your-words/) is motivating and helps you stick to the habit of writing daily.
    * Christian also wrote a Mac app for this: the [Word Counter](http://wordcounterapp.com/).
* Getting started with writing projects:
    * Buffer files in your Zettelkasten are great to [store writing ideas](/posts/manage-writing-ideas/).
    * [Use outlines](/posts/how-i-use-outlines-to-write-any-text/) to start with the first draft, and then
    * [ease into writing](/posts/ease-into-writing/) by adding Zettel notes to the outline, pasting their contents. This works [without you trying so hard.](/posts/write-book-without-even-trying-so-hard/)
* [Divide composing from editing your texts](/posts/writing-composing-revising/) to reach a state of flow and get faster at finishing your projects.
* [Publish iteratively](/posts/publish-iteratively/).

## Reading

* [Create a bibliography](/posts/bibliography-zettelkasten/) as part of your toolkit. It's a permanent companion and keeps track of your sources of information.
* The [Barbell Method of Reading](/posts/barbell-method-reading/) explains how to get most out of any text. Read thoroughly and invest more time (risky investment) when necessary, stick to quickly skimming (low risk) for the rest.
* Reading on paper
    * [Make proper reading marks](/posts/making-proper-marks-in-books/) instead of leaving annotations in the margin.
    * You should [take reading notes instead](/posts/reading-putting-it-all-together/). Get the stuff _out_ of the book. (This is closely related to the [Collector's Fallacy](/posts/collectors-fallacy/).)
    * [Create Zettel from reading notes](/posts/create-zettel-from-reading-notes/) afterwards.
* Reading online
    * [How to read on the web efficiently](/posts/reading-web-rss-note-taking/), using and managing RSS feed subscriptions.

Commit message:

add link to Johannes' research

content/posts/overview.md, after:

---
title: Overview
updated_at: 2019-11-20 11:43:00 +0100
toc: true
---

{{toc}}

**********

So you're here for a starting point.

Using a Zettelkasten is about optimizing a workflow of learning and producing knowledge. The products are texts, mostly. The categories we find fit the process well at the moment are the following:

* _Knowledge Management_:  general information about what it means to work and learn efficiently.
* _Writing_:  posts on the production of lasting knowledge, and about sharing it with others through your own texts.
* _Reading_:  posts about the process of acquisition of new things and the organization of sources.

We started to feature application reviews to see how well they fit the Zettelkasten workflow. You most likely want to pick an app that adapts well to your work, so our [tools page](/tools/), the [list of blog posts tagged "review"](/posts/tags/review), and our [software forum](https://forum.zettelkasten.de/categories/tools) are all good starting points. There's a lot of other software on the web you could experiment with, so don't feel limited to our selection!

If you want to know more about us and how we roll, take a look at [the "personal" tag](/posts/tags/personal/). Also check out the [ongoing research on Luhmann's Zettelkasten by Johannes Schmidt](https://uni-bielefeld.de/soz/luhmann-archiv/publikationen.html) at Bielefeld University.

## Getting Started

* [How many Zettelkästen should I have?](/posts/how-many-zettelkasten/) The answer is, most likely, only one for the duration of your life. But there are exceptions to this rule.
* [Don't use categories.](/posts/no-categories/) Use tags instead.
* "What should my first note be?" -- [it doesn't matter.](/posts/your-first-note/) Just get started.
* [Set links between notes.](/posts/search-alone-is-not-enough) Full-text search on its own provides not enough information. Connections will do, especially in the long run.
* ["When should I start a new note?"](/posts/when-start-new-note/)
    * Also read ["Trust the process"](/posts/trust-the-process-nickmilo22/), an essay.
* You have to [interpret your sources](/posts/dont-rely-on-source-have-faith-in-yourself/) and then rely on your own thoughts henceforth to get the maximum benefit. Collecting information does not increase your knowledge.
* [Use outlines](/posts/how-i-use-outlines-to-write-any-text/) to start with the first draft of your writing project.
* Then [ease into writing](/posts/ease-into-writing/) by adding Zettel notes to the outline, pasting their contents in. 

<%# <!--ct: keep in sync with content/posts/2015/07/getting-started.txt --> %>

## Principles

> Principles are higher than techniques. Principles produce techniques in an instant.  
> ---Ido Portal

* [Principle of Atomicity](/posts/create-zettel-from-reading-notes/): put things that belong together into a single note, [give it an ID](/posts/add-identity/), but limit its content to that single topic.
* Our post about the [Principle of Connectivity](/posts/luhmann-folgezettel-truth/) highlights how different techniques can implement the same underlying principle, here links vs Folgezettel to connect notes. Also see a discussion about [Different Kinds of Ties Between Notes](/posts/kinds-of-ties/).

## Knowledge Management

[The building blocks of a Zettelkasten](/posts/zettelkasten-building-blocks/) are the **inbox**, the **note archive**, and the **reference manager**.

These are the basics to get started with effective knowledge management:

* [Use a real notebook](/posts/use-real-notebook/) to capture thoughts.
* Write notes for your note archive [in a way you understand later.](/posts/how-to-write-notes-you-can-understand/)
* [Add Identity](/posts/add-identity/) to things in the system to make references possible.
* [Don't use categories.](/posts/no-categories/) Use tags instead.
    * [Good and bad tags](/posts/object-tags-vs-topic-tags/) explained: some tagging habits will get in your way eventually.
* [Set links between notes.](/posts/search-alone-is-not-enough) Search alone is not enough.
* Every Zettel has two forms: [an inner and outer form](/posts/zettel-nature-two-forms/).

And always keep in mind [The Collector's Fallacy](/posts/collectors-fallacy/): you have to work with new material to really learn it. It doesn't suffice to bookmark websites or just read and annotate books. (Christian still has [skeletons in the closet](/posts/collectors-fallacy-confession/).)

To get you in the mood to grow your archive, read ["Trust the process"](/posts/trust-the-process-nickmilo22/), an essay.

### Scaling your note archive

To cope with the constant influx of new information, [use temporary "buffer" notes](/posts/buffer-notes/) to collect stuff that you can later re-arrange.

With time, you'll notice multiple [Layers of Evidence](/posts/layers-of-evidence/) emerge. This means your notes will have different kinds of content. The layers are:

1. Data description and patterns.
2. Interpretation of descriptions and patterns.
3. Synthesis of patterns, descriptions and interpretation.

When your archive grows, you'll add [Structural Layers in your Zettelkasten](/posts/three-layers-structure-zettelkasten/) through links. The levels are:

1. Bottom Layer: Content
2. Middle Layer: Structure Notes
3. Top Layer: Main Structure Notes and Double Hashes (that is: special tags)

### About learning and knowing-more in general

["Trust the process"](/posts/trust-the-process-nickmilo22/) (an essay) hits the nerve: thinking and memory retention are improved by working through problems.

* [A Zettelkasten improves your thinking and writing](/posts/zettelkasten-improves-thinking-writing/) because it surprises us when we search for something. 
* [A Zettelkasten extends your mind and memory](/posts/extend-your-mind-and-memory-with-a-zettelkasten/) because its structure mimics the way your brain works.
* [Learn faster](/posts/learn-faster-by-writing-zettel-notes/): get coverage with good reading techniques, get practice by writing Zettel notes, and gain insights by connecting notes to your web of knowledge.
* You have to [interpret your sources](/posts/dont-rely-on-source-have-faith-in-yourself/) and then rely on your own thoughts henceforth to get the maximum benefit.

## Writing

* [Make writing a part of your identity](/posts/identity-schedule-serious-writing/). This requires to schedule time for writing, and to create lasting habits.
* How to become a better writer:
    * A [daily writing practice](/posts/useful-daily-writing-practice/) will help lower the hurdle to get started, for example.
    * [How to track your writing progress](/posts/how-to-track-writing-progress/) -- define metrics and find out how well you perform.
    * [Counting your words](/posts/count-your-words/) is motivating and helps you stick to the habit of writing daily.
    * Christian also wrote a Mac app for this: the [Word Counter](http://wordcounterapp.com/).
* Getting started with writing projects:
    * Buffer files in your Zettelkasten are great to [store writing ideas](/posts/manage-writing-ideas/).
    * [Use outlines](/posts/how-i-use-outlines-to-write-any-text/) to start with the first draft, and then
    * [ease into writing](/posts/ease-into-writing/) by adding Zettel notes to the outline, pasting their contents. This works [without you trying so hard.](/posts/write-book-without-even-trying-so-hard/)
* [Divide composing from editing your texts](/posts/writing-composing-revising/) to reach a state of flow and get faster at finishing your projects.
* [Publish iteratively](/posts/publish-iteratively/).

## Reading

* [Create a bibliography](/posts/bibliography-zettelkasten/) as part of your toolkit. It's a permanent companion and keeps track of your sources of information.
* The [Barbell Method of Reading](/posts/barbell-method-reading/) explains how to get most out of any text. Read thoroughly and invest more time (risky investment) when necessary, stick to quickly skimming (low risk) for the rest.
* Reading on paper
    * [Make proper reading marks](/posts/making-proper-marks-in-books/) instead of leaving annotations in the margin.
    * You should [take reading notes instead](/posts/reading-putting-it-all-together/). Get the stuff _out_ of the book. (This is closely related to the [Collector's Fallacy](/posts/collectors-fallacy/).)
    * [Create Zettel from reading notes](/posts/create-zettel-from-reading-notes/) afterwards.
* Reading online
    * [How to read on the web efficiently](/posts/reading-web-rss-note-taking/), using and managing RSS feed subscriptions.
