content/posts/overview/index.md, before:

---
title: Getting Started
updated_at: 2021-12-29 10:30:21 +0100
toc: true
---
{{toc}}

## The Introduction to the Zettelkasten Method

Are you new to the Method?

[Read the Introduction to the Zettelkasten Method](/introduction) and learn what makes the Zettelkasten work as a system, how to create notes, how to connect notes to make a web of knowledge, and how to create structures so you stay in control of the growing knowledge web.

Using a Zettelkasten is about optimizing your workflow of learning and producing knowledge. The products are texts, mostly. The categories we find fit the process well at the moment are the following:

* [_Knowledge Management_](#knowledge-management):  general information about what it means to work and learn efficiently.
* [_Writing_](#writing):  posts on the production of lasting knowledge, and about sharing it with others through your own texts.
* [_Reading_](#reading):  posts about the process of acquisition of new things and the organization of sources.

## Common Questions

<%# <!--ct: keep in sync with content/posts/2015/07/getting-started.txt --> %>

* [How many Zettelkästen should I have?](/posts/how-many-zettelkasten/) The answer is, most likely, only one for the duration of your life. But there are exceptions to this rule.
* [Don't use categories.](/posts/no-categories/) Use tags instead.
* "What should my first note be?" -- [it doesn't matter.](/posts/your-first-note/) Just get started.
* [Set links between notes.](/posts/search-alone-is-not-enough) Full-text search on its own provides not enough information. Connections will do, especially in the long run.
* ["When should I start a new note?"](/posts/when-start-new-note/)
    * Also read ["Trust the process"](/posts/trust-the-process-nickmilo22/), an essay.
* You have to [interpret your sources](/posts/dont-rely-on-source-have-faith-in-yourself/) and then rely on your own thoughts henceforth to get the maximum benefit. Collecting information does not increase your knowledge.
* [Use outlines](/posts/how-i-use-outlines-to-write-any-text/) to start with the first draft of your writing project.
* Then [ease into writing](/posts/ease-into-writing/) by adding Zettel notes to the outline, pasting their contents in.
* [Everything you want to know about "Folgezettel"](https://zettelkasten.de/folgezettel/): a curated overview.

## Principles

> Principles are higher than techniques. Principles produce techniques in an instant.<br>
> ---[Ido Portal](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iNry_JLb4yE)

* [Principle of Atomicity](/posts/create-zettel-from-reading-notes/): put things that belong together into a single note, [give it an ID](/posts/add-identity/), but limit its content to that single topic.
* Our post about the [Principle of Connectivity](/posts/luhmann-folgezettel-truth/) highlights how different techniques can implement the same underlying principle: links vs note sequences.
    - There's [an expanded explanation of this argument](/posts/understanding-hierarchy-translating-folgezettel/) from 5 years after the initial post about this principle.
    - See the related discussion about [Different Kinds of Ties Between Notes](/posts/kinds-of-ties/).

## Knowledge Management

[The building blocks of a Zettelkasten](/posts/zettelkasten-building-blocks/) are the **inbox**, the **note archive**, and the **reference manager**.

These are the basics to get started with effective knowledge management:

* [Use a real notebook](/posts/use-real-notebook/) to capture thoughts.
* Write notes for your note archive [in a way you understand later.](/posts/how-to-write-notes-you-can-understand/)
* [Add Identity](/posts/add-identity/) to things in the system to make references possible.
* [Don't use categories.](/posts/no-categories/) Use tags instead.
    * [Good and bad tags](/posts/object-tags-vs-topic-tags/) explained: some tagging habits will get in your way eventually.
* [Set links between notes.](/posts/search-alone-is-not-enough) Search alone is not enough.
* Every Zettel has two forms: [an inner and outer form](/posts/zettel-nature-two-forms/).

And always keep in mind [The Collector's Fallacy](/posts/collectors-fallacy/): you have to work with new material to really learn it. It doesn't suffice to bookmark websites or just read and annotate books. (Christian still has [skeletons in the closet](/posts/collectors-fallacy-confession/).)

To get you in the mood to grow your archive, read ["Trust the process"](/posts/trust-the-process-nickmilo22/), an essay.

### Scaling your note archive

To cope with the constant influx of new information, [use temporary "buffer" notes](/posts/buffer-notes/) to collect stuff that you can later re-arrange.

With time, you'll notice multiple [Layers of Evidence](/posts/layers-of-evidence/) emerge. This means your notes will have different kinds of content. The layers are:

1. Data description and patterns.
2. Interpretation of descriptions and patterns.
3. Synthesis of patterns, descriptions and interpretation.

When your archive grows, you'll add [Structural Layers in your Zettelkasten](/posts/three-layers-structure-zettelkasten/) through links. The levels are:

1. Bottom Layer: Content
2. Middle Layer: Structure Notes
3. Top Layer: Main Structure Notes and Double Hashes (that is: special tags)

### About learning and knowing-more in general

["Trust the process"](/posts/trust-the-process-nickmilo22/) (an essay) hits the nerve: thinking and memory retention are improved by working through problems.

* [A Zettelkasten improves your thinking and writing](/posts/zettelkasten-improves-thinking-writing/) because it surprises us when we search for something.
* [A Zettelkasten extends your mind and memory](/posts/extend-your-mind-and-memory-with-a-zettelkasten/) because its structure mimics the way your brain works.
* [Learn faster](/posts/learn-faster-by-writing-zettel-notes/): get coverage with good reading techniques, get practice by writing Zettel notes, and gain insights by connecting notes to your web of knowledge.
* You have to [interpret your sources](/posts/dont-rely-on-source-have-faith-in-yourself/) and then rely on your own thoughts henceforth to get the maximum benefit.

## Writing

* [Make writing a part of your identity](/posts/identity-schedule-serious-writing/). This requires to schedule time for writing, and to create lasting habits.
* How to become a better writer:
    * A [daily writing practice](https://christiantietze.de/posts/2013/12/useful-daily-writing-practice/) will help lower the hurdle to get started, for example.
    * [How to track your writing progress](/posts/how-to-track-writing-progress/) -- define metrics and find out how well you perform.
    * [Counting your words](/posts/count-your-words/) is motivating and helps you stick to the habit of writing daily.
    * Christian also wrote a Mac app for this: the [Word Counter](http://wordcounterapp.com/).
* Getting started with writing projects:
    * Buffer files in your Zettelkasten are great to [store writing ideas](/posts/manage-writing-ideas/).
    * [Use outlines](/posts/how-i-use-outlines-to-write-any-text/) to start with the first draft, and then
    * [ease into writing](/posts/ease-into-writing/) by adding Zettel notes to the outline, pasting their contents. This works [without you trying so hard.](/posts/write-book-without-even-trying-so-hard/)
* [Divide composing from editing your texts](/posts/writing-composing-revising/) to reach a state of flow and get faster at finishing your projects.
* [Publish iteratively](/posts/publish-iteratively/).
* Field Report: [A PhD About Writing with His Zettelkasten](/posts/henrik-zettelkasten-paper-submission/). Henrik talks about his process from draft to submission, to revision, to being accepted in a journal.

## Reading

* [Create a bibliography](/posts/bibliography-zettelkasten/) as part of your toolkit. It's a permanent companion and keeps track of your sources of information.
* The [Barbell Method of Reading](/posts/barbell-method-reading/) explains how to get most out of any text. Read thoroughly and invest more time (risky investment) when necessary, stick to quickly skimming (low risk) for the rest.
* [Reading for the Zettelkasten is searching](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/reading-is-searching/): next time you tackle a long text, try to look for very specific kinds of information that lend themselves to being extracted.
* Reading on paper
    * [Make proper reading marks](/posts/making-proper-marks-in-books/) instead of leaving annotations in the margin.
    * You should [take reading notes instead](/posts/reading-putting-it-all-together/). Get the stuff _out_ of the book. (This is closely related to the [Collector's Fallacy](/posts/collectors-fallacy/).)
    * [Create Zettel from reading notes](/posts/create-zettel-from-reading-notes/) afterwards.
* Reading online
    * [How to read on the web efficiently](/posts/reading-web-rss-note-taking/), using and managing RSS feed subscriptions.

## Use Cases

* [Zettelkasten for fiction writing](/fiction) is a collection of articles on how to apply the Zettelkasten Method to fiction.

## History of the Zettelkasten

If you want to know more about the history of the Zettelkasten Method, check out the [ongoing research on Luhmann's Zettelkasten by Johannes Schmidt](https://niklas-luhmann-archiv.de/projekt/publikationen) at Bielefeld University. Johannes is the _Guardian of the Godfather's Zettelkasten_, and his work is genuinely interesting for knowledge work nerds.

We also cover the relevant bit of history in [our introduction](/introduction) to explain how the Zettelkasten Method works.

## Tools

Since 2018, we offer our own app, [The Archive for macOS](/the-archive), to manage your Zettelkasten. Since then, we stopped reviewing commercial tools because of a clash of interests. We honestly think The Archive is great, and that you should check it out.

Since we don't review paid apps anymore [in accordance with our software review principle](/our-software-review-policy/), if you are interested in apps for other platforms and other tools, check out our [forum about software and gadgets](https://forum.zettelkasten.de/categories/tools) for tips from the community.

### The Archive

Get to know the app better:

- [How to Use Tabs](/posts/how-to-use-tabs-in-the-archive/), a short demo video.
- [How to Capture Images](/posts/the-archive-image-capturing-video/)
- [How to Use Wiki Links for Saved Searches in The Archive](/posts/wiki-links-as-searches/), a "hack" of sorts to use links to restore your searches.

Extending The Archive's functionality with scripts and other apps:

- In the forums, we have a [Collection of Keyboard Maestro/Alfred Macros](https://forum.zettelkasten.de/discussion/213/the-archive-keyboard-maestro-alfred-macros) where most if not all macros from the forums are aggregated.
- There's a cohesive [Alfred Macro collection](/posts/alfred-macros-the-archive/) with complete workflows.
- Interoperability with the Markdown preview app, Marked 2, supports [streaming note previews (YouTube)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DVPi4WG5rQc)

Use cases and demos for inspiration:

- [Using The Archive to Teach Music](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/zettelkasten-music-teacher/)
- [Creating Structure Notes (YouTube)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QOhme6QEECg)

Commit message:

link to translation from overview

content/posts/overview/index.md, after:

---
title: Getting Started
updated_at: 2022-12-07 19:05:30 +0100
toc: true
---
{{toc}}

## The Introduction to the Zettelkasten Method

Are you new to the Method?

[Read the Introduction to the Zettelkasten Method](/introduction) and learn what makes the Zettelkasten work as a system, how to create notes, how to connect notes to make a web of knowledge, and how to create structures so you stay in control of the growing knowledge web.

Using a Zettelkasten is about optimizing your workflow of learning and producing knowledge. The products are texts, mostly. The categories we find fit the process well at the moment are the following:

* [_Knowledge Management_](#knowledge-management):  general information about what it means to work and learn efficiently.
* [_Writing_](#writing):  posts on the production of lasting knowledge, and about sharing it with others through your own texts.
* [_Reading_](#reading):  posts about the process of acquisition of new things and the organization of sources.

## Common Questions

<%# <!--ct: keep in sync with content/posts/2015/07/getting-started.txt --> %>

* [How many Zettelkästen should I have?](/posts/how-many-zettelkasten/) The answer is, most likely, only one for the duration of your life. But there are exceptions to this rule.
* [Don't use categories.](/posts/no-categories/) Use tags instead.
* "What should my first note be?" -- [it doesn't matter.](/posts/your-first-note/) Just get started.
* [Set links between notes.](/posts/search-alone-is-not-enough) Full-text search on its own provides not enough information. Connections will do, especially in the long run.
* ["When should I start a new note?"](/posts/when-start-new-note/)
    * Also read ["Trust the process"](/posts/trust-the-process-nickmilo22/), an essay.
* You have to [interpret your sources](/posts/dont-rely-on-source-have-faith-in-yourself/) and then rely on your own thoughts henceforth to get the maximum benefit. Collecting information does not increase your knowledge.
* [Use outlines](/posts/how-i-use-outlines-to-write-any-text/) to start with the first draft of your writing project.
* Then [ease into writing](/posts/ease-into-writing/) by adding Zettel notes to the outline, pasting their contents in.
* [Everything you want to know about "Folgezettel"](https://zettelkasten.de/folgezettel/): a curated overview.

## Principles

> Principles are higher than techniques. Principles produce techniques in an instant.<br>
> ---[Ido Portal](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iNry_JLb4yE)

* [Principle of Atomicity](/posts/create-zettel-from-reading-notes/): put things that belong together into a single note, [give it an ID](/posts/add-identity/), but limit its content to that single topic.
* Our post about the [Principle of Connectivity](/posts/luhmann-folgezettel-truth/) highlights how different techniques can implement the same underlying principle: links vs note sequences.
    - There's [an expanded explanation of this argument](/posts/understanding-hierarchy-translating-folgezettel/) from 5 years after the initial post about this principle.
    - See the related discussion about [Different Kinds of Ties Between Notes](/posts/kinds-of-ties/).

## Knowledge Management

[The building blocks of a Zettelkasten](/posts/zettelkasten-building-blocks/) are the **inbox**, the **note archive**, and the **reference manager**.

These are the basics to get started with effective knowledge management:

* [Use a real notebook](/posts/use-real-notebook/) to capture thoughts.
* Write notes for your note archive [in a way you understand later.](/posts/how-to-write-notes-you-can-understand/)
* [Add Identity](/posts/add-identity/) to things in the system to make references possible.
* [Don't use categories.](/posts/no-categories/) Use tags instead.
    * [Good and bad tags](/posts/object-tags-vs-topic-tags/) explained: some tagging habits will get in your way eventually.
* [Set links between notes.](/posts/search-alone-is-not-enough) Search alone is not enough.
* Every Zettel has two forms: [an inner and outer form](/posts/zettel-nature-two-forms/).

And always keep in mind [The Collector's Fallacy](/posts/collectors-fallacy/): you have to work with new material to really learn it. It doesn't suffice to bookmark websites or just read and annotate books. (Christian still has [skeletons in the closet](/posts/collectors-fallacy-confession/).)

To get you in the mood to grow your archive, read ["Trust the process"](/posts/trust-the-process-nickmilo22/), an essay.

### Scaling your note archive

To cope with the constant influx of new information, [use temporary "buffer" notes](/posts/buffer-notes/) to collect stuff that you can later re-arrange.

With time, you'll notice multiple [Layers of Evidence](/posts/layers-of-evidence/) emerge. This means your notes will have different kinds of content. The layers are:

1. Data description and patterns.
2. Interpretation of descriptions and patterns.
3. Synthesis of patterns, descriptions and interpretation.

When your archive grows, you'll add [Structural Layers in your Zettelkasten](/posts/three-layers-structure-zettelkasten/) through links. The levels are:

1. Bottom Layer: Content
2. Middle Layer: Structure Notes
3. Top Layer: Main Structure Notes and Double Hashes (that is: special tags)

### About learning and knowing-more in general

["Trust the process"](/posts/trust-the-process-nickmilo22/) (an essay) hits the nerve: thinking and memory retention are improved by working through problems.

* [A Zettelkasten improves your thinking and writing](/posts/zettelkasten-improves-thinking-writing/) because it surprises us when we search for something.
* [A Zettelkasten extends your mind and memory](/posts/extend-your-mind-and-memory-with-a-zettelkasten/) because its structure mimics the way your brain works.
* [Learn faster](/posts/learn-faster-by-writing-zettel-notes/): get coverage with good reading techniques, get practice by writing Zettel notes, and gain insights by connecting notes to your web of knowledge.
* You have to [interpret your sources](/posts/dont-rely-on-source-have-faith-in-yourself/) and then rely on your own thoughts henceforth to get the maximum benefit.

## Writing

* [Make writing a part of your identity](/posts/identity-schedule-serious-writing/). This requires to schedule time for writing, and to create lasting habits.
* How to become a better writer:
    * A [daily writing practice](https://christiantietze.de/posts/2013/12/useful-daily-writing-practice/) will help lower the hurdle to get started, for example.
    * [How to track your writing progress](/posts/how-to-track-writing-progress/) -- define metrics and find out how well you perform.
    * [Counting your words](/posts/count-your-words/) is motivating and helps you stick to the habit of writing daily.
    * Christian also wrote a Mac app for this: the [Word Counter](http://wordcounterapp.com/).
* Getting started with writing projects:
    * Buffer files in your Zettelkasten are great to [store writing ideas](/posts/manage-writing-ideas/).
    * [Use outlines](/posts/how-i-use-outlines-to-write-any-text/) to start with the first draft, and then
    * [ease into writing](/posts/ease-into-writing/) by adding Zettel notes to the outline, pasting their contents. This works [without you trying so hard.](/posts/write-book-without-even-trying-so-hard/)
* [Divide composing from editing your texts](/posts/writing-composing-revising/) to reach a state of flow and get faster at finishing your projects.
* [Publish iteratively](/posts/publish-iteratively/).
* Field Report: [A PhD About Writing with His Zettelkasten](/posts/henrik-zettelkasten-paper-submission/). Henrik talks about his process from draft to submission, to revision, to being accepted in a journal.

## Reading

* [Create a bibliography](/posts/bibliography-zettelkasten/) as part of your toolkit. It's a permanent companion and keeps track of your sources of information.
* The [Barbell Method of Reading](/posts/barbell-method-reading/) explains how to get most out of any text. Read thoroughly and invest more time (risky investment) when necessary, stick to quickly skimming (low risk) for the rest.
* [Reading for the Zettelkasten is searching](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/reading-is-searching/): next time you tackle a long text, try to look for very specific kinds of information that lend themselves to being extracted.
* Reading on paper
    * [Make proper reading marks](/posts/making-proper-marks-in-books/) instead of leaving annotations in the margin.
    * You should [take reading notes instead](/posts/reading-putting-it-all-together/). Get the stuff _out_ of the book. (This is closely related to the [Collector's Fallacy](/posts/collectors-fallacy/).)
    * [Create Zettel from reading notes](/posts/create-zettel-from-reading-notes/) afterwards.
* Reading online
    * [How to read on the web efficiently](/posts/reading-web-rss-note-taking/), using and managing RSS feed subscriptions.

## Use Cases

* [Zettelkasten for fiction writing](/fiction) is a collection of articles on how to apply the Zettelkasten Method to fiction.

## History of the Zettelkasten

If you want to know more about the history of the Zettelkasten Method, check out the [ongoing research on Luhmann's Zettelkasten by Johannes Schmidt](https://niklas-luhmann-archiv.de/projekt/publikationen) at Bielefeld University. Johannes is the _Guardian of the Godfather's Zettelkasten_, and his work is genuinely interesting for knowledge work nerds.

We cover the relevant bit of history in [our introduction](/introduction) to explain how the Zettelkasten Method works.

Check out [the translation of Luhmann's own Zettel about his Zettelkasten](/posts/luhmanns-zettel-translated).


## Tools

Since 2018, we offer our own app, [The Archive for macOS](/the-archive), to manage your Zettelkasten. Since then, we stopped reviewing commercial tools because of a clash of interests. We honestly think The Archive is great, and that you should check it out.

Since we don't review paid apps anymore [in accordance with our software review principle](/our-software-review-policy/), if you are interested in apps for other platforms and other tools, check out our [forum about software and gadgets](https://forum.zettelkasten.de/categories/tools) for tips from the community.

### The Archive

Get to know the app better:

- [How to Use Tabs](/posts/how-to-use-tabs-in-the-archive/), a short demo video.
- [How to Capture Images](/posts/the-archive-image-capturing-video/)
- [How to Use Wiki Links for Saved Searches in The Archive](/posts/wiki-links-as-searches/), a "hack" of sorts to use links to restore your searches.

Extending The Archive's functionality with scripts and other apps:

- In the forums, we have a [Collection of Keyboard Maestro/Alfred Macros](https://forum.zettelkasten.de/discussion/213/the-archive-keyboard-maestro-alfred-macros) where most if not all macros from the forums are aggregated.
- There's a cohesive [Alfred Macro collection](/posts/alfred-macros-the-archive/) with complete workflows.
- Interoperability with the Markdown preview app, Marked 2, supports [streaming note previews (YouTube)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DVPi4WG5rQc)

Use cases and demos for inspiration:

- [Using The Archive to Teach Music](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/zettelkasten-music-teacher/)
- [Creating Structure Notes (YouTube)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QOhme6QEECg)
